First draft of TS++ blog (#187)
Zaplib/zaplib: zaplib/docs/src/blog_ts++.md

# Language idea: Typescript++

_JP Posma, April 2022_

> Typescript and Rust feel pretty similar. In some ways, Rust feels like a more restrictive but faster version of Typescript. But Typescript/Javascript can be very fast too; owing to years of hard work by browser vendors. In this article we'll look at the performance characteristics in more detail, and if we can have the best of both worlds.

Reviewer: > Typescript and Rust feel pretty similar.

This sentence can't stand on its own, particularly as a very first sentence. One solution is to write some code in both languages and put them side by side to show how similar a _subset_ of Rust can look like a _subset_ of TS.

Another solution is to explain how the type system is similar, pariticular if you avoid X,Y,Z Rust features, and the main difference is that Rust adds a borrow checker which is what allows it to A, B, C.

> Of course, WebAssembly is a much younger technology than Javascript. Both the implementation and the APIs of WebAssembly have a lot of room to grow, so if we're comparing both language's _potential_ we can't just look at current state of things. But it's hard to make predictions about the future, so let's see where we stand today.

Reviewer: This paragraph could be deleted or moved lower or rewritten as follows:

```suggestion
To be fair, WebAssembly is a much younger technology than Javascript. Both the implementation and the APIs of WebAssembly have a lot of room to grow. It simply hasn't had the time and resources that JavaScript & V8 have had to be so damn fast! While we can only look at the benchmarks of today, it's reasonable to hope that there's room for WebAssembly to continue to get faster, even relative to JavaScript. There simply might be more lower hanging fruit left.
```

The rewritten version would be a fascinating conversation starter with Ben Smith and others on twitter!

Another problem with benchmarks is that they often don't measure realistic scenarios. For example, it's easy to [trick yourself](https://benediktmeurer.de/2016/12/16/the-truth-about-traditional-javascript-benchmarks/#garbage-collection-considered-harmful) into not measuring garbage collection time, by finishing your measurements before the garbage collector can run.

Let's be a bit more precise about comparing JS vs Wasm. First, there are two metrics that are interesting:
1. **Maximum performance.** How fast can a significantly hand-tuned implementation get?

> 2. **Canonical performance.** How fast can you get using standard language features or libraries?

Reviewer: Excellent framing. Other name ideas:

* idiomatic performance
* ergonomic performance

I think I prefer either of those two. Not sure which.

Author: I like idiomatic!

### Maximum performance

> In terms of maximum performance, JS gets pretty close to Wasm. In both cases, it's possible to operate directly on byte arrays (`ArrayBuffer`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In terms of maximum performance, JS and Wasm are roughly the same (except in a small number of edge cases), because in either it's possible to operate directly on byte arrays (`ArrayBuffer`):
```

1. This means that you avoid any garbage collection or Javascript object overhead.
2. You're in full control over allocations / cache locality / etc.
3. Javascript is very fast when just using loops, local variables, arithmethic, function calls, etc.

> This is the case that most of the benchmarks mentioned above focus on. Even there, you can find benchmarks which produce spectacular results, like the [hash-wasm benchmark](https://daninet.github.io/hash-wasm-benchmark/), in which the Wasm version is often 10x faster. But in most cases you'll find much more modest results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the case that most of the benchmarks mentioned above focus on. Even there, you can find benchmarks which produce spectacular results, like the [hash-wasm benchmark](https://daninet.github.io/hash-wasm-benchmark/), in which the Wasm version is often 10x faster. But in most cases you'll find much more modest results, because the JavaScript benchmarks are manually managing memory (which is the slowest part of JavaScript).
```

As of current writing, there are a couple of differences in language features and implementations that give either JS or Wasm an edge:
* **JS**: Access to zero-copy native APIs, like `TextEncoder` and `FileReader.readAsArrayBuffer`. In JS you can immediately use the result of these functions, whereas in Wasm you first need to copy the result into the Wasm memory.
* **JS**: Zero-copy multiple memories. You can cheaply create multiple `ArrayBuffer`s, whereas in Wasm there is only a single memory, and growing it is fairly expensive.
* **Wasm**: SIMD instructions. SIMD.js APIs have been [deprecated](https://github.com/tc39/ecmascript_simd) in favour of a Wasm-only implementation.

> * **Wasm**: Upfront compiler optimizations. JS can hot-swap in optimized bytecode (even profile-guided optimization based actual program behavior), but this takes a while to kick in. Running such an optimizer also consumes resources. With Wasm you can run an optimizer upfront, and for much longer.

Reviewer: It took me a little while to understand the format of this list. One fix would be a table. Another fix would be to make it two lists: "javascript has an edge in these ways:" and "wasm has an these advatanges:"

### Canonical performance

> Canonical performance might be more interesting to most people. You want the code that is naturally easy to write to be performant. However, even here we have to be careful! For most software, performance follows a power law, where a small fraction of code takes most of the time. In that case it's not a big deal to hand-optimize that part. Canonical performance is more important if such "hot code" is spread out over the entire codebase, which is quite rare.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canonical performance might be more interesting to most people. You want the code that is naturally easy to write and maintain to be performant. However, even here we have to be careful! For most software, performance follows a power law, where a small fraction of code takes most of the time. In that case it's not a big deal to hand-optimize that part. Canonical performance is more important if such "hot code" is spread out over the entire codebase, which is quite rare.
```

![](./img/benchmark.gif)

[This 3d character animation benchmark](https://www.lucidchart.com/techblog/2017/05/16/webassembly-overview-so-fast-so-fun-sorta-difficult/) is the best benchmark I've found so far for canonical performance:

> 1. It's an dual implementation of a relatively complex system in canonical Javascript and canonical JS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It's an dual implementation of a relatively complex system in canonical Javascript and canonical C++ (compiled to Wasm).
```

It's pretty easy to address these concerns if we're willing to write less canonical code, by storing all `vecs` in a big ArrayBuffer, where every pair of numbers is represented as 16 bytes: first the `x` coordinate as a 64-bit (8-byte) floating point number, followed by the `y` coordinate in the same format:

```typescript
// Optimized Typescript, using ArrayBuffers
function avgLen(vecs: ArrayBuffer): number {
    let total = 0;
    let float64 = new Float64Array(vecs);
    for (let i=0; i<float64.length; i += 2) {
        const x = float64[i];
        const y = float64[i+1];
        total += Math.sqrt(x*x + y*y);
    }
    return total / (float64.length / 2);
}
```

> This is less ergonomic, but avoids all of the problems that we had with the canonical implementation. Now, the strength of WebAssembly is that you can write this faster version without having to compromise on ergnomics. For example, the equivalent of this second version in Rust would look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is less ergonomic, but avoids all of the problems that we had with the canonical implementation. 

The strength of WebAssembly is that you can write this same code in a managed-memory language, so the canonical version is as fast as JavaScript's maximally-hand-tuned version. For example, the equivalent in Rust:
```

1. Rust can be scary! While easier to learn than C++, the learning curve can still be steep, especially when you have to learn to think about ownership and the borrow checker.
2. Toolchain integration can be daunting. You need to set up Rust in development builds, production builds, local testing, continuous integration, and so on.
3. Communicating data between JS and Rust is a bit of work to set up, and can even be expensive, if you need to copy data back and forth a lot.
4. People have often already invested a lot into JS optimizations, and have developed expertise.

With Zaplib we try to make all of this easier; e.g. for (1) we make the Rust APIs in our framework as easy to use as possible; for (2) we've already built Webpack and Node.js integrations and are planning more; and for (3) we're building a JS-Rust bridge that is hopefully easier to use than [wasm-bindgen](https://github.com/rustwasm/wasm-bindgen). But still, in many cases the juice might not be worth the squeeze, if instead you can just do some local optimizations of the Javascript instead. Even if that makes some parts of the codebase less canonical / ergonomic, it might be the right tradeoff.

### Typescript++

> I'm wondering if there is a way to bring some of the benefits of Rust to Typescript, by adding the ergonomics from Rust, but still compiling to Javascript — no Wasm needed. There are different ways we could go about this. For example, you could imagine a syntax very similar to the original Typescript, but which would compile to the optimized Typescript with ArrayBuffers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I'm wondering if there is a way to bring some of the benefits of Rust to Typescript, by adding the ergonomics from Rust, but transpiling to Javascript — no Wasm needed. There are different ways we could go about this. For example, you could imagine a syntax very similar to the original Typescript, but which would compile to the optimized Typescript with ArrayBuffers:
```

Reviewer: <img width="636" alt="Screen Shot 2022-04-06 at 3 50 28 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2288939/162085484-9d67f08c-22d4-4c5a-9761-8d9b220d0ec6.png">

```typescript
// Typescript++
type Vec2 = { x: number, y: number };

function avgLen(vecs: ArrayBuffer<Vec2>): number {
    let total = 0;
    for (const vec in vecs) {
        total += Math.sqrt(vec.x*vec.x + vec.y*vec.y);
    }
    return total / vecs.length;
}
```

This would be an extension of the language; so we could call it "Typescript++" or so, since every Typescript program would also be a valid Typescript++ program, but not the other way around. Of course, it is possible to something like this purely with libraries, like [BufferBackedObject](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/buffer-backed-object), but doing this at the language level feels a lot more ergonomic.

This might be a bit of a niche analogy, but this quote about using C-style datatypes in LuaJIT captures it quite well:

> <blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">this is cool (from <a href="https://t.co/rPYJ0nXuLt">https://t.co/rPYJ0nXuLt</a>)<br><br>&quot;I often write my LuaJIT programs from the ground up designed around C data types and C-style memory allocation discipline. But I can always ditch that in areas where I know I don&#39;t care…&quot; <a href="https://t.co/898pcPvhaP">pic.twitter.com/898pcPvhaP</a></p>&mdash; Omar Rizwan (@rsnous) <a href="https://twitter.com/rsnous/status/1309673353045704705?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 26, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Reviewer: This is a confusing quote of a quote. I'd just quote the original person and then give a h/t hat tip to Omar and link to his tweet in the hat tip
